Title: L2. Must Know Tricks in Bit Manipulation | Swap two numbers without third variable
Video ID: nttpF8kwgd4
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

So, we will be continuing with the bit manipulation playlist, but before that, hey, welcome back to the channel. I hope you guys are doing extremely well. So, in this video, I'll be covering up a lot of problems, yes. And the first problem will be swap two numbers. So, the problem statement is swap two numbers. So, you'll be given two numbers, A and B. So, assume A is given as 5, B is given as 6. Now, your task is to swap them. So, after swapping, A will be having 6, B will be having 5. How can I do it? It's very simple. I can say, I'll take a third variable temp, I'll store the value of A into it. So, temporary will be having the value 5 initially when we start with this state. Done. After that, I say, okay, A equal to B. So, I take the value of B, which is 6 and I put it into A. After that, I say B equal to, can I say B equal to A? I cannot. Why? Because if I say B equal to A, A's value is 6. So, B will still stay as 6. This is the reason I took a third variable temporary. So, basically, I'll say B equal to temp, B will be taking the value 5. So, it'll be 5. Done and dusted. But over here, I'm using a third variable. Now, in an interview, the interviewer might ask you, can you solve this without using the third variable? That is where the XOR operator will come in. What is the XOR operator? Quick recap. Even number of 1's will be 0, odd number of 1's will be 1. Can I say that, if I XOR two same numbers, 5 XOR 5, the value will be 0. Why? 5 is 1, 0, 1 in binary, and again, 5 is 1, 0, 1 in binary. If I'm doing a XOR, since they are same numbers, every row will have even number of 1's, and wherever there is 0, there will be even number of 1's, that is 0 number of 1's. So, everything will be 0, 0, 0. So, thereby, XOR of same numbers will be 0. So, I will be using the XOR operator in order to swap two numbers. Let us see how. So, what I will write is, A equal to A XOR B, and this will be my step number 1. After this, I will write B equal to A XOR B again, right? So, if I write this, what will happen is, this A, what is the value of this A? Can I say this much? It is, because this is what I did in step 1. So, I can write A XOR B is what A is, and then XOR of B. Now, what is B XOR B? That is 0. So, eventually, B is equal to A. Agreed or not? Agreed. After this, I will again write A equal to A XOR B. Now, tell me one thing. What is the value of A? The value of A is this much, right? So, I will write this again. A XOR B XOR of B. This time, what is the value of B? It's A. It is A, right? So, I can just write it as A. It is not B anymore. It is A. So, A XOR A will go off as 0, and eventually, it will be left out with B. So, if you see, what we did was B equal to A, A equal to B. The XOR operation will do it for you. So, this is how you can easily swap. So, it's very simple. Three lines, and you can easily swap two numbers without using the third variable. So, time for the next problem, which is check if the i-th bit is set or not. So, what is the problem stating? It's stating that you will be given a value n, imagine 13, and you will be given a value i, imagine 2. Now, your task is to check if the second bit in the number 13 is set or not. So, what is 13 in binary? 1, 1, 0, 1. Agreed. This is what 13 is in binary. Now, your task is to check if the second bit, and you count the bits from the right to left. So, 0, first, second. Is the second bit set? It will be like, yes, it is set. So, it will have to return a true. Got it? Imagine I change the value. I change this to, let's say, 1. In that case, this is the 0-th bit. This is the first bit, and it is not set. So, it will be returning false. I can probably ask you 10-th bit as well. If I ask you if the 10-th bit is set or not. In that case, it will have hypothetical zeros. So, it will never be set. Got it? So, how do you solve this problem? The brute force that I can think of is, I take the number 13, convert it into its binary equivalent. We have already done it. After that, I start traversing from the back, and I figure out if the i-th bit is 1 or 0. And then I can return a true or false. But for that, I will have to convert a number into its binary. I don't want to do it. How can I do it with using bitwise operators? So, there are two ways. One is the left-shift operator, while the other one is the right-shift operator. I have already told you about this in the last video, right? So, let's understand how can I use the left-shift operator. So, value 13, that's 1, 1, 0, 1, technically, in binary, right? I've been asked for i equal to 2, which is the second bit. So, where is the second bit? Here? So, can I write something like, 1 left-shift of 2, which is basically i. 1 left-shift of i. So, what will happen is, if I write this, this is 1. So, on shifting it by one place to the left, you will get something as 1 here and then a 0. And if you try to again shift it, you will get 1, 0, 0. So, this is the number that you will get if you try to shift 1 by two places. Got it? So, what you will do is, you will take one left-shift of i places. So, what you will get is, 1, 0, 0. Once you have this, what you can do is, you can simply do the AND operation. So, if you do an AND operation, you know one thing for sure. Apart from this 1, everything else is a 0. Apart from this 1, everything else is a 0. So, if you are doing an AND, all of these places will be 0 for sure because you have a 0 and if you do an AND with 0, you get a 0. But for this 1, if this is 1, you will end up writing 1. If this is 0, you will end up writing 0. Right? So, you will basically get a number, a number which is greater than 0. Right? So, I can say one thing. Okay? If n and 1 left-shift of i, if this is a non-zero number, I am very sure it is set. Else, it is unset. Super simple. Let me take an example where it is unset. So, if I take the number 13, we will use some other color. n equal to 13 and i equal to 1. What will happen in this case is 13 is 1, 1, 0, 1. Correct? i is 1. So, I am saying 1 left-shift of 1 place. That is basically here. And then there is a 0. So, everything else is 0. So, everyone else will go 0 and this is a 0. So, thereby this will also go 0. So, you will eventually get 0. Got it? So, if you say n and 1 left-shift of i, i is the number, like the bit that you want to check. If that is non-zero, that means it is set. Otherwise, it is unset. So, this is how you can easily do it by using the left-shift operator. So, let's now understand how can I do it by using the right-shift operator. So, what is 13? 1, 1, 0, 1. I have to check the second bit. That's basically 0, 1, 2. This is the bit that I want to check. So, what I will do is, I will try to take this bit to the extreme right. I will try to take this bit to the extreme right. So, I will say, right-shift by 2 places. Right-shift by 2 places. So, what will happen is, this 0 and this 1 will go off the clip. And this 1 will be here. This 1 will be here and everything else will be 0. After shifting it right by 2 places. Done. So, this is the bit that you want to check, if it is set or not. So, what you will do is, you will do an AND with 1. You will do an AND with 1. So, if this is set, it will automatically give you 1 and all the other things will be 0. So, they will be 0. So, if this number is 1, if this number is, because this is 1, in decimal this is 1, if this number is 1, it is set. Otherwise, it is unset. Let me take one more example. Imagine if N is 13 and I is 1. In this case, 13 is 1, 1, 0, 1. You have to shift it right by 1 place. That means, this will go off the clip. This 0 will be here, this 1 will be here, this 1 will be here and everything else will be 0. Now, what you do is, AND with 1, so we do an AND with 1, everything else is 0. So, 0, 0, 0 and this will also be 0. So, what you basically write is, if N right-shift by I places with an AND of 1, if that is equal to 0, that means it is unset, else it is set. So, either you right-shift, either you right-shift and bring this one to the extreme right, either you can do that or you can left-shift and place a 1 and place a 1 right below that bit. Simple, by left-shift or by right-shift. So, the time complexity and the space complexity will be big of 1. It is extremely fast because the computer performs bitwise operations much much faster than all the other operations. So, the next problem is setting the i-th bit. So, the problem is stating that, it will be given a value of N, imagine 9, it will be given a value of i, imagine 2. So, if I try to write 9 in its binary, it will be 1, 0, 0, 1. Now, the second bit from the right is 0, 1, 2. This is 0. Your task is to set it to 1. Your task is to set the i-th bit to 1 and keep all the other bits as it is. Once you have done it, the value will be 13. Now, what if this was 1? You still keep it as 1, doesn't matter. You have to make that bit as 1. So, the number is 13. Now, what if I ask you the brute force? The brute force is very simple. You convert it into its binary which is 1, 0, 0, 1. You figure out the second bit. You make it 1 and then you convert it back into its decimal. A long process. Can I do it in a better way? Probably yes. Let's try to write 9 in its binary. 1, 0, 0, 1. I'm trying to convert this bit which is the second bit. So, what if I can place a 1 over here? Can I place a 1 right underneath it? Probably I can. What I'll try to do is, I'll take a 1 which is technically something like 0, 0, 0, 0, like dot dot dot 32 bits. That's 1. If I say left shift by 2 places. This number will be so this 1 will go here. Left shift. And this will be 0. You know the left shift operator, right? This is what you will get. Something like this, right? Agreed? After this, if you try to do a OR operation. OR operation. So this is 1. If you do an OR with 0 or 1 doesn't matter. It will always be 1. This is 0. And you're sure that the underneath value is 0 as well. So this will always be 0. Now this is 0. But the underneath value is 1 because you have done it. You have done it. That's why this will be 1 because you're doing an OR operator. After that, this is 1. So it will just be 1. Apart from this, whatever the bits were, they will get they will basically get transferred. And this 0 will turn into 1 because you're doing an OR with 1. Got it? So this is how I can do it. Quite simple. I'll write N OR which is the pipe operator. And 1 left shift of I. This is how I can set the ith bit. Got it? Even if it is 1. Let's take that example as well. So if I take N equal to 13, I ask you to set the second bit again. So what is 13? That's 1, 1, 0, 1. Now this is the second bit. Right? I'll try to place a 1 here which is basically 1 left shift of 2 places. So I'll get something like this. And then I do an OR. What will happen? 1, 0, 1 or 1. That's 1. 1 or 0. That's 1. So you'll still get the same number. If it is set, you'll get the same number. If it is not set, in that case, what you'll get is in this case, you got the number, right? So this is how you can easily set the ith bit using the bitwise operator. So the next question is clearing the ith bit. Now the problem states it'll be given a value N. Let's take 13. It'll be given I. Let's take 2. Now your task is to basically 13 in binary is 1, 1, 0, 1. Now your task is to clear the ith bit which is 0, 1, 2. Your task is to clear the second bit. Clearing means turn the 1 to 0. And if it is 0, keep it as 0. So if you clear this, this will turn to 0. And the rest will stay as it is. So the number will be 9. Again, the brute force will be convert this into its binary. Once you've done it, go to the second bit, put a 0, and again reconvert it into its decimal. That is a long process, so what will be the brute force? Rather, what will be the process using bitwise operators? It's going to be very simple. What is 13? 1, 1, 0, 1, right? I want to turn it so can I say, if I put a 0 here, if I put a 0 here and I put 1 across all the numbers, all the 32 bits, I put a 1. And after that, if I do an AND, will it work? It will, because if I put a AND because of the 0, because of the 0, this will turn out to be 0. And all the other numbers, if this is 1, and there's a 1, so AND will give you 1. And if this is a 0, 0 AND with anything will give you a 0. Agreed? 0 AND with a anything will give you a 0. Again, 1 will always be AND with a 1, so 1, again 0, 0, so you will actually turn it off. You'll actually turn it off. The only thing that you need to do is, you need to somehow, yes, you need to somehow make sure that this ith bit is 0 and your job will be done. Again, it is very, very simple. Just think, how can you do it? I'll give you a hint. First step is, try to place a 1 over here and rest all 0s. Can you do that? Can you do that? Probably, yes, we can do that. How can I do that? It's going to be very simple. I say 1, left shift of I, which is 2, so I'll get this value something like 1, 0, 0, and all 0s, because 1, left shift by 2 places, will put the 1 over here, right? I'll do a negation of it. I'll do a NOT operator of it. So once I put the NOT operator, what will happen is, this was something like 0, 1, 0, 0, I'm not writing all the 32 bits, I'll do a NOT of it. So this, this will turn out to be 1, 0, 1, 1, and rest all our 1s. So basically, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, and all our 1s. And you do an AND with it. So 1 and 1 is 1, 0 and 1 is 0, 1 and 0, will turn it off. 1, 0, 0, so you basically turn off that bit. So how you can do it is, N and negation of 1, left shift of i, very, very simple, none understood. So the next question is, toggling the i-th bit. Now the problem is stating that it will be given a value n, again let's take 13, and let's take i equal to 2. So basically 13 in its binary is 1, 1, 0, 1, which is the second bit, that is 1. You'll have to toggle it, change it. So this will become 0, this will be 1, this will be 0, this will be 1, so that's 9. Now I'm asking you to toggle, not clear. Toggling is different. Imagine I give you n equal to 13, i equal to 1. So in this case, 1, 1, 0, 1. First bit is this one. So after toggling, it will be 1, 1, 1, 1. So you make a 0 to 1, and you make a 1 to 0. Reverse it. Whatever is the bit at the i-th position or index, whatever you can call it. How can I do it? It's again very simple. Hint is ZOR operator. Like again, the brute force is take this number, convert it into its binary equivalent, which is 1, 1, 0, 1, figure out the second bit. If it is 1, make it 0, or vice-versa, and convert it into its decimal. But how can you do it with using bitwise operator? The hint is ZOR. You can try it out. So what you will do is, you'll take the number 1, 1, 0, 1, and write it in its binary. Written. After that, you try to think, okay, this is the bit that I'm looking forward to change. If I'm able to put a 1 underneath it, again, it's very simple. You know how to do it? One left shift of I, if I do this, I will be able to put a 1 underneath it, okay? And all the other things as 0. Now, can I say, if I do a ZOR, if I do a ZOR, what will happen is, 1s or 1, because it is even number of 1s, will turn out to be 0. It will toggle it. And the rest, 1s or 0, 1, odd number of 1s, so 1, 0s or 0 is 0, 1s or 0 is 1, right? So you actually toggled it, and you kept all the bits same. Will it work for the other case? Which is, if it is unset, let's take the example. N equal to 13, I equal to 1. Let's try to write it. 1, 1, 0, 1. I'm trying to toggle this. So I'll again put a 1 over here, which is 1, left shift of 1, okay? And put a 0 at all the other places. I'll try doing a ZOR. So 1s or 0, again odd number of 1s, so 1s. 0s or 1, again odd number of 1, so 1, 1s or 0, 1, 1s or 0, 1. So you actually toggled this 0 to a 1. You actually toggled this 1 to a 0. You were able to do it. Super simple. You see N ZOR 1 left shift of I. That's it. That is how you can easily toggle the Ith bit. So time for the next problem, which is removing the last set bit. So in this problem, you'll be given a value N. And your task is to remove the last set bit, or the right most set bit. So if I try to write 12 in binary, it'll be 1, 1, 0, 0. And if I ask you which is the last set bit, can I say the right most set bit is this one? Yes. You have to turn this, like remove it, or just clear it. So after clearing, it'll be 0, and the rest will be 0. So this is what you will get. So if I ask you for 13, if I have to remove the last set bit, it'll be 1, 1, 0, 1. So the last set bit is this one, so you'll get it as 1, 1, 0, 0. Got it? If I give you a value as 16, that is 1, 0, 0, 0. Another 0. Now which one is the last set bit? This one. So the number will be 0, 0, 0, 0, which is technically 0. How can you remove the last set bit? Again, if I have to do the brute force way, it's super simple. Convert this into its binary, traverse, and reject the last set bit, make it 0, and again, convert it back into its decimal equivalent. Obviously, we don't want to do it like that, so we'll think of a bitwise operation that will help us to do it. So before I move on to the solution, which will be a one-liner, let us observe something. So n is 16, right? That's basically 1, 0, 0, 0, and probably one more 0, yeah. This is 16. If I say n15, which is basically n-1. If I take 15, that may be 0, 1, 1, 1, 1. This is 15. Okay. So n is 40. If I try to write it, it will be 32 plus 8, so 32, 16 will go as 0, and then there's 8, so this is 8, and then this one. I think this is 40. This is 40, right? If I take the number 39, I can actually write 39 without thinking, and that will be 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1. Yes, this is 39 for sure. So let's write the binary for 84. It'll be 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, double 0. So this is for 84. If I ask you to write for 83, it will be 1, 0, 1, 0, a 0, and then a 1, 1. Time to observe something. The rightmost set bit is this one. The moment you do n-1, the moment you do n-1, the rightmost set bit is converted to 0, and all the right bits that were there because all of them will be 0. Because I'm talking about rightmost set bit, so everything to the right will be 0s. All of them will get converted into 1. Again, let's try to observe. So this is the rightmost set bit. I'm converting n to n-1. What will happen is 1, 0 is 1, 0. This one gets converted into 0, and all the 0s to the right will get converted into 1. Works. Let's look at 84. So when I take 84, this is the rightmost bit. So I'll reduce 84 by 1. What will happen is 1, 0, 1, 0. And this one gets converted into 0. And the rightmost 0s will be 1 and 1. Yes. This is what happens. Why does it happen? Let's understand that. So I'm saying 16. Now what was 16? 16 was nothing but 2 to the power of 4. 2 to the power of 4 was 16. 15 will be all the powers of 2 lesser than it. Which is basically 8 plus 4 plus 2 plus 1. Whereas this was straight away 16. Okay. Let's look at 40. What was 40? 40 was 32 plus 8 which is basically 2 to the power 5 plus 2 to the power 3. Right? So what happens is 32 stays and when you convert it into 39 which is 1 reduction. So this 8 goes to the nearest number down which is 7. And 7 you know is 4 plus 2 plus 1. Because of this 4 plus 2 plus 1, all of them are set as 1. Got it? Have you understood what happens? So the observation that we will draw from here is the rightmost bit is turned to 0. And everything else on the right is turned to 1111. If you take a number down. If you take a number down. Remember this. So I've been asked to remove the last set bit. How can I do it? It's super simple. All you need to write is I'll probably erase this. Yeah. All you need to do is you have to write N and N minus 1. Why does it work? Let's take 40. So what is 40? That's 1 0 1 0 0 0. Which is the rightmost set bit? You'll have to remove it. So you take an AND. Right? Remember you need to remove this only. So you'll just turn it to 0. And everything else stays as 0. And you copy paste this on the left whatever it is. You just copy paste as it is. So what you need to do is if you take N minus 1 which is basically 1 0. This will be 0 and all the other things will be 1. So what happens is if you're doing an AND this 1 and 0 will be 0. Everything else will be 0. And since you're taking the same numbers because on the left there is no change. If you do an AND you exactly get the same numbers. Got it? Let's take one more example. Let's take N as What's that? 84. So if I take N as 84 that's basically 1 0 1 0 1 double 0. Right? Again what do I need to do? I need to turn off this bit. So which is basically I'll have to make a 0 here 0 and everything else on the left stays as it is. So again the same thing. If I take this is N and I take N minus 1 which is you know this is 0 this is 1 this is 1 and everything else stays as it is. If I do an AND the 0 1 will be 0 0 1 will be 0 and this 1 and 0 will be 0 and since these are same they stay the same. So if you do N and N minus 1 that will be removing the last set bit. So time for the next question that is checking if the number is a power of 2 or not. So the problem statement will be giving you a number N imagine it is 16. Is it the power of 2? Yes it is 2 to the power 4. Imagine you are given a number N equal to 13. Is it a power of 2? No it is not. Imagine you are given a number N equal to 32. Is it a power of 2? Yes it is. How can you say this? Now the easiest like the brute force is very simple you take 16 convert it into its binary done once you have converted it into its binary you check the number of 1s. So you just get 1 set bit so you can say that there is 1 set bit so yes it is a power of 2. If you take 13 convert it into its binary which is 1 1 0 1 how many set bits? 3 set bits. So this is not a power of 2. If you again look at 32 how many set bits? 1 0 0 0 0 0 I think that is probably that is 32. Again 1 set bit. So technically I know one thing there must be 1 set bit but I cannot do the brute force where I convert this into its binary and then figure it out. So can I have a different way? Probably yes. I know that every power of 2 will have 1 set bit in it 1 set bit in it. So can I do this? N and N minus 1 and this is equivalent to 0 it is a power of 2 or else it is not. Yes I have already told you what happens when you do N minus 1. So 16 is 1 0 0 0 0. If you do N minus 1 the right most bit that is turned off and everything on the right is turned into 1. Now since for power of 2's there is only one set bit there will be nothing on the left. So when you do an and everything turns out to be 0. Everything turns out to be 0. Got it? In the same case when you take 13 what happens is 13 is 1 1 0 1. Right? So when I say 12 that is nothing but 1 1 0 0 because I am taking N and N minus 1 and I am doing an and with it. So what happens is when you do an and this is 0 this is 0 but because of the left bits because of the left bits to the right most set bit there are left bits there are numbers there are numbers formed. So this will never be 0 this will never be 0. So can I say this that if I write N and N minus 1 because every power of 2 only has one set bit and if I am turning it off everything will be 0. So this is how you can easily check if a number is a power of 2 using bitwise operator 1 9. So time for the next problem that is counting the number of set bits in a given number. So imagine you are given a number 16 so you have to write it in its binary so that will be 1 0 0 0 how many number of set bits? Only 1. So you will return me 1. Imagine again you are given 13 so what will it be in its binary? 1 1 0 1 1 2 3 so you will return me 3 Got it? How can I do it? Is there a 1 9? Now there is no 1 9. It will be pure brute force. So let us write the brute force. What I will do is I have to count so I will take counter equal to 0 I will take counter equal to 0. I will start with the number 13 so in order to convert a decimal to its binary I divide by 2. So when I divide by 2 I get a remainder of 1. So I will just increase the counter by 1 so there is 6 again divide by 2 so this time the remainder is 0. So I will not increase the counter. Again divide by 2. This time the remainder is 1. So please increase the counter by 1. Again divide by 2 so you will get 1. So when you get 1 you stop then and there so when you stop at the end you had 1. So you will increase the counter by 1 simple as that So can I write down the function? Probably yes. I will say integer count set bits and I can take the number int n perfect What is the first thing that I will do? I will take a variable counter and then I know I will have to write a wine loop while n greater than 1 because that is when we stop So can I say if n modulo 2 equal to 0 if n modulo 2 equal to 0 I don't count anything because the remainder is not there So can I write if the remainder is 1 then I say counter plus equal to 1. Can I say this? I can and after this I can say n equal to n divided by 2 Done and dusted. At the end of the day if the n is equal to equal to 1 you increase the counter by 1 and then you return that Done. Looks ok Right? But can I do something else? Probably yes Now this is checking for odd Right? If there is a remainder it means it is checking for odd So can I write something as n and 1 instead of writing n modulo 2? Can I write n and 1? Probably yes. Now let's take an odd number. 13 for that reason is an odd number. So 1, 1 0, 1. So if I do and with 1 I'll get 1 and rest of all of them will be 0s. Right? Why? Why did I get a 1? Because the last bit of an odd number will always be 1 The last bit of an odd number will always be 1. Let's take for that reason 6. So if I try to write 6 that will be 4 plus 2 right? 1, 1, 0 That is 6. Last bit is not set. So if I do an and with 1 I'll get 0, 0, 0 Why is the last bit set? Because if I have to write 13 13 is 8 plus 4 plus 1. Only the last bit will give you 1. Only the last bit will give you 1. Apart from that all of them will be even numbers. Even plus even will be even. And then if you add an odd number which is 1 you actually get 13. For 6 it is 4 plus 2 For 7 it is 4 plus 2 plus 1. For every odd number you'll have to add a 1. So the last bit for all the odd numbers will always be set. Will always be set. Remember this. So if it is set can I replace this by if n and 1 I can. Or can I say counter plus equal to n and 1 because this will return 1 if it is odd and this will return 0 if it is even. Bitwise. And what about this? You know it. Which operator? Yes, right shift. So can I write n equal to n right shift of 1 because this is equivalent to writing n by 2 to the power 1 or n by 2. Remember right shift operator. So I did the same thing. I just converted this into a bit stuff. Now if you do bit operations it is slightly faster than the other operations. That is why in most of the competitive programmers code you'll find the odd check as this. This is their odd check. They will never write n modulo 2 equal to 1. They'll always write something like this. If they're dividing they'll always write n right shift of 1. Right if they're dividing it by 2. Most of your binary search code when you write something as low plus high by 2 this is what you write right? Like this is what you write. But the faster version is low plus high and then right shift by 1. Because right shift by 1 means dividing by 2. So this is how you count the number of set bits. If you're using C++ STL in the STL lecture I've already told you there is an internal function STL in underscore pop count and you can pass in the integer. This will tell you the number of set bits in a given number. So there is one more way in which we can count the number of set bits. Let's take the number 84. If I try to write this in binary it will be 1010 100. Now if I ask you to write n minus 1 which is 83 it's binary. You know what it will be. You'll take the rightmost bit turn it to 0 and the right bits will be turned to 1. Everything else stays as it is on the left. So 1010011. Now if I ask you to do an AND what you'll get is 0000101 So what I was able to do was I was able to turn off the rightmost bit I was able to turn off the rightmost bit by simply doing n and n minus 1. So once I've done it I'll get a number like this. Correct? Now if I ask you to write a minus 1 of this number like a minus 1 of this number let's write this number that's 10100000 Now a minus 1 of this number will be 1111 a 0 here and the left one will be same. So again what has happened is this rightmost bit which is 1 has been replaced with 0 and everything on the right has been replaced with 1s. Again if you do an AND what will happen is you'll get 00000 and then a 01. So what has happened is you've turned off the rightmost bit you've turned off the rightmost bit. Perfect. Again if I take this number which is 100000000 and I do a minus 1 the number that I'll get is 011111 I'll do an AND I'll get 00000000 So what has happened is again the rightmost bit has been turned off. So can I follow a similar pattern? Maybe yes. So thereby I'll write counter equal to 0 and I'll be like while n is not equal to 0 and at every step what I'll do is n equal to n and n minus 1 and I'll do a counter plus plus. So what will happen is if there's a number like 84 and there are 3 bits which are on and there are 3 bits which are on at the first step the rightmost bit is turned off at the second step the second rightmost bit is turned off and at the last step this one will be turned off. So I'll keep on doing n and n minus 1. I'll keep turning off the rightmost bit and at the end of the day n will be 0. So count will be your number of said bits at the end of the day. And what will be the time complexity over here? The time complexity over here will be B go of the number of said bits. At the worst possible scenario this can be B go of 31 for an integer which is similar to the one that we did when we were dividing by 2 because in that scenario as well the worst possible case is logarithmic B go logarithmic base to n which can go as B go of 31 if your number is as big as 2 to the power 31 like the biggest number then that can also take a lot of time but since most of the numbers will not have all of them turned like all of the bits as 1. This is a better approach to count the number of said bits which is taking B go of number of said bits so remember this one. So yeah that's it for this particular video. I hope you've understood everything and if that is the case please please do consider giving us a like and if you're new to our channel do consider subscribing to us as well. With this I'll be wrapping up this video. Let's meet in some other video. Till then bye take care.
