Title: [Day 16] - Static and Dynamic Libraries (ar, objdump, ld, ldd) - Crash Course in C Programming
Video ID: YtiPCPtmZrs
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Hey, what's going on, folks? It's Mike here and welcome to the next lesson in our C programming language series. In this lesson, we're going to talk about how to create your own libraries in the C programming language. I'm going to talk about static libraries that you can link in statically, as well as shared object files or sometimes known as DLLs on Windows and dynamic libraries on Mac, but shared object files or dynamically loaded libraries on the Linux platform. So with that said, let's go ahead and look at an example and some of the tools that we're going to need to use to understand how to exactly build libraries in the C programming language. So what I've got here on the right side is just a standard sort of bare bones C project here. So I'm going to go ahead and compile this and let's just go ahead and compile it as our program here. Now, a tool that I want to go ahead and show you is called LDD. And what it's going to do here is print out the shared object dependencies. Okay. So what does that mean? Well, let's just go ahead and take a look here. If I run this, I'll do LDD on our program. And wow, all of a sudden we see all these different files or all this information that's spit out to us here on the terminal. And the main thing that I want you to see here is that even just to create this one program, there's lots of other libraries or shared object as indicated by the extension SO here being added to our executable. And GCC is doing this behind the scenes so that we don't have to do this. And especially for very common libraries, these are the ones that are available for instance. So one in particular that's relatively important that we've been using a lot in this series, if we look carefully through the list is libc or the C standard library that as you imagine, when we do standard input outputs or work with strings or math functions would be brought in. Okay. So we don't have to link that into our program. So behind the scenes, again, there is this stage that's performed after compiling our code where we have to link in these dependencies into our actual binary file that we're executing. That is this dot slash prog here. That's what's going on. Okay. So we want to understand what's going on there and how to build our own libraries is how we're going to understand this process. So what I'm going to go ahead and do, here's my structure here, let's go ahead and create a library here. Now, typically how we like to do this and organize our projects is to create some include directory and a source directory as well. And maybe even a library directory or these types of things. For now, I'm going to just go ahead and keep things relatively simple here. I'm going to move our main file into source, and then here's what our project will look like here. So inside the source directory is where my source files will be. And then I'll have my include here. Okay. So where this discussion goes is about how we one organize our projects into, you know, the actual physical structure here of our project, but also, you know, why we're going to want to build things out as libraries. Why would one do this? Well, let's go ahead and start building a library here. So I'll get rid of that file here and I'm just going to call it my math dot H and let's go ahead and say, uh, if not defined my math H then define my math H and then end if here. So these are our header guards to ensure that we only include this file once. And then let's go ahead and provide some functions here, something like an ad function. I get to keep this a really simple library here. So that's all I have. And let's just go ahead and split this file here. Uh, and in the source directory, I'll create my math dot C and include, uh, my math dot H. And then we'll have the actual definition of this ad function here where we understand how to actually do the work here. Okay. So that's the idea. Here is our structure, two source files. Um, and then we'll have one in the include, uh, directory here, which let me go ahead and move this one appropriately here. So move my math into include, and there we go. Here's our structure here. Okay. Now let's actually make use of this actual project here. So again, just so you can see everything going on, we have the my math file here and then in our, uh, main, let's go ahead and, uh, open this up and our source directory and I'll go ahead and include my math dot H. Okay. And now we can also make use of the, uh, add function here. Now let's just go ahead and do one instance of it. Uh, we'll just go ahead and add some numbers here. Let's do add four and seven equals. And in order to compete that result, let's use our ad function of four and seven. And there it is. Okay. So if we want to compile this program, well, how do we do it? Well, we need to do GCC, and then we need all of our C files in the source directory, and then we'll output our program. But will this work? Well, let's go ahead and see. Uh, well, not quite cause we can't find this include file here. So we do have to tell our compiler on the command line to do include the stuff that's in our include path here. So dot slash include, and that's it here. And now it compiles here. So I'll make this a little bit smaller so you can see the difference there. Okay. So that's the idea again, we're feeding the compiler some information about where to find our actual files. And now I can actually run this and we'll go ahead and see the result. So again, this is one way of sort of modularizing or breaking our program into smaller pieces, right? We build things in different files, but now here's where the library part comes in, where we say, Hey, I want to actually share this math library because it's very useful with my friends. So how do we do that? Well, in order to do that, we're going to go ahead and start breaking apart, uh, how we compile our software. So rather than just compiling all of our files, uh, in this way, I want to break this down into some smaller steps here. And so you can actually see the actual object files that we put together. Okay. So what I can do here is just instead of, uh, compiling everything together. And again, GCC is doing a little bit of magic as we saw compiling and linking and gluing together all these files. Let's just do one at a time. So I could do dash C here. And then our, uh, main file, which is in the source directory. So like this, and then I'll hit enter here. And again, it's going to give me that error. Cause we're including something here that it doesn't know about. So I do need to do that, uh, dash, uh, capital I include, and then it compiles. And now if I look, we have a main object file here. Okay. And that's just the object file. So let's go ahead and do this for our, uh, math, uh, library here. So my math dot C do the same thing. And now we have my math, uh, dot O here. So this itself is the library. It's a piece of code, a block of code that contains the information of how to actually implement or the definition, the actual logic here of how to perform addition here, a plus B and that itself is a library. And then anybody who wants to use our library just has to include this header file here, which would be publicly available. It says, Hey, uh, to our actual code, we have these declarations here, these functions that exist. Uh, but, um, you know, so you can use them, but you'll have to link in the my math dot O file in order to do this. So let's go ahead and try to do it just from these object files and see if this works. I'll use GCC this time, the main, Oh, my math dash, uh, dot O and include program. And again, I'm going to do this, but try to think about what I'm forgetting here. So I'll hit enter and, uh, we're good to go here. Okay. Um, and now I'm able to, uh, run here. Okay. Just the same as before I have my program here. In fact, let me remove it just to ensure that that's not what we had recompile it. And we have it. They actually don't need to include anymore. Once this is, once these files have been successfully, um, compiled, then they're ready to link together. Okay. So, um, I don't need to do, for instance, here dash I include or anything of that nature here. Okay. It's just going to, again, once these are object files, they've been successfully built here. Okay. So now in theory, you can give this my math dot O to anybody in the world who's on a Linux system like mine and wants to take advantage of this object file here. Okay. So that's pretty cool that we can actually do that. Uh, and this is an example of a static library. Okay. So my math dot O is going to get compiled in with our other code, which is just the main file right here in build a executable. So we would say that this is statically linking in this library when we do this. Okay. Uh, so let's go ahead and look at the size of our actual program. When we do this, well, here is the actual size here. One five nine five two. So we'll just kind of keep that in mind here. If we want to compare that with a hello world or something, well, we can go ahead and see that, but this is just added a little bit of code here, uh, for our library, which we can see again, how big, uh, this library is, and it looks like, right. And just to make this a little bit easier, let's go ahead and, um, just so you could see the actual, uh, file sizes here in terms of, um, kilobytes, just so you can have a range there. Okay. So, uh, let's go ahead and see how we can, again, add to this library or maybe write some other functions here. So again, I've got my math library here, uh, and let's go ahead and say that, you know, we have, um, other, uh, libraries that we want to add in here. So I'm going to go ahead and create another one here. I'm going to call it my math too. And I'm essentially just going to copy these files here in our source directory here. So let's make a copy of my math, uh, too. And I'll make a copy of in our include directory, my math too for the header file. And the purpose of this is just to add a little bit more functionality into our program. So I'll go ahead and show you on the code screen. What I'm going to do here. Let's open up my math to here. And again, I want to update our header guards. And I'm just going to call this, uh, multiply here, something like that. And we'll split this window in the source directory. My math too will include my math too, and the multiply function here. And we'll also implement it appropriately. And then finally in our main file, let's go ahead and just make sure that we test this out to make sure that it's working. And we expect four times seven to be a 28 this time. Okay. So again, now that we have this code, it's relatively trivial. Let's see how to again, build a library out of it. Okay. So I'm going to go back here and then I'm going to do GCC dash C the file that I want to compile my math, uh, two dot C on. Let's see. So again, I'll hit enter. It's going to give us an error because we need to include, uh, our include directory here. There we have it. And now we have our other file here. And now I can just go ahead and do again, GCC, our main file, my math to, uh, my math, uh, dot O here. And then whatever I want to output it as program here. Okay. I'm going to compile this. Let's see what happens. If I run it. Uh, well, it didn't update this, uh, here, uh, right. We're supposed to be doing a multiplication here. Okay. So what was the problem? Well, again, we need to go back in our compilation step here. And what did I change? Well, I changed this main dot C file. So that's where I need to say, okay, I need to actually rebuild that part of the project. Okay. So GCC dash C for our main file. And again, uh, by now, you know, the mistake that we're always going to make, uh, we needed to include everything and now it compiles. Okay. So now I've updated main dot C here. Now let's go ahead and try our command here where we are linking in everything together and I'll go ahead and run it here. Okay. So now we can actually see our update. Now, what was the point of that exercise or again, motivating this idea of libraries? Well, what was really cool here is I didn't change any of this code here, right? From our my math, the first iteration with just the add function. So because I have broken my program down into smaller components, I don't need to recompile the whole thing. Now, in this tiny example, it's not really going to make a difference. It's still going to compile relatively fast, but it can imagine code bases in games or engines or, you know, really large distributed systems. This really starts to matter when your compile times are minutes or hours or maybe even longer in terms of times of compute that you have to spend. So this is where we really start getting some advantages by modularizing our code in this way. Okay. So that's a little lesson there. Now, what can I do here? If I have a set of common components here? So I've got my math and my math too. And those are sort of related, but again, for whatever reason, I wanted to split these up and we could imagine there being many functions in each of these libraries. So in order to create a library, because again, if I want to send these to my friends rather than send them to files, wouldn't it be nice if I could just sort of collect a bunch of related components in this instance, math functions. So what I'm going to do is use a tool called archive and archive is exactly what it sounds like. It's sort of like building a zip file. If you've ever done that of collecting these components together in a nice sort of indexable way. So let's go ahead and just look at the man page for it. And we have this tool AR on Linux and there would be equivalent tools on windows and Mac for creating, modifying and extracting from an archive, which is just a single file holding a collection of other files. Okay. So let's go ahead and do this. Now, the options that I'm going to pass here, I'm just going to tell you. So are for replacing if this archive file already exists, C for creating it because we'll have to create it and then S for building the index here. And then what I'm going to go ahead and do, and let's, let's look at our options again. We are going to want to output the name here and, uh, that, that should be it. So AR RCS, the files that we want to index. And we'll also have to give this a name here. So I'm just going to call it, uh, my math and by convention dot a for archive. Okay. And then each of our files, my math dot O and my math two dot. Oh, I'll hit enter. And just like that, let's see, we've got our, my math archive here. Okay. So now let's go ahead and look at how do we build this static library. And again, this is our actual archive, which consists of these two files here. All right. So this time, let's go ahead and use GCC. We've got our main file here. And let's go ahead and try to include in, uh, my math dot a here and output the program here. Let's see what happens. Go ahead and hit enter. And just like that works just the same here. Okay. And we could go ahead and see, uh, our file here, our file size, uh, still relatively, um, unchanged here might've grown a little bit bigger when we added in the second library here. Uh, but that's the tool. So now if we want to distribute our actual application, again, all we need to distribute is this actual program file. And that's it. So just, uh, Prague here and that's got everything bundled together. And then we also have the added advantage. Again, if we look at all of our contents, we're now I've got this archived file here or this static library, which is a collection of my math to, and my math dot O that we can distribute to our friends. Okay. Now for the library owners and own all this code, then, you know, part of our build process will be compiling, uh, my math, my math too, and then building it into this archive here. Now the question that I want to give to you is to think about how expensive is this? So in the sense of size, so what if, for instance, we're doing add or multiply or even something like print F, which you can imagine pretty much every C program does over and over and over again, you have hundreds or thousands of programs on your actual operating system, however big or small that they are that are using this functionality. Well, the answer to that is this is probably pretty expensive, meaning that we're duplicating this library, whether, you know, both of these libraries or even just one of them over and over and over again for every program. So in order to solve this, we have another tool known as a shared object file S O. And again, these go by different names and different operating systems like dynamically linked library on windows or dialybs on Mac. So these are files that you can link in at runtime when your compilers, um, or rather your operating systems about to run your program and I'll link in the correct library code, uh, kind of patch things together to make sure that these functions from the libraries are able to be called from executable. Okay. So let's go ahead and see how we can now, instead of making this a static library, build a library, that's a shared object file. So in order to do this, let's go ahead and, um, compile each of our libraries as a, uh, shared library here. So I'm going to go to GCC again, and I'll explain these arguments in a moment, but dash F for a flag here, PIC for position independent code dash shared. And then, uh, what I want to output my library as, um, uh, I'll call it, um, actually let me see, uh, I think it'll choose for us. Uh, and let's actually put in, uh, my math, uh, see here, or actually it's in the source directory, my math dot C. Let's see how far we get with this. Uh, well, again, the same thing we're compiling. Sorry, had to do that for you one more time. Let's put our include path here and well, it compiles. And what was generated for us when we did this? Well, here it looks like we got an A dot out, uh, because we didn't specify any names. So I mean, let's, let's see, does that do anything for us? Uh, that slash Ada out, uh, now it looks like we're getting some sort of segmentation fault. Okay. So maybe we didn't do that quite right here. So let's try again here. Let's actually give it an output and I'll call my math dot S O because this is meant to be a shared object file. Okay. So there we are. Okay. And let's do the same thing, uh, for my math too, just so we have both of these ready here. And I've got two, uh, shared object files here. Okay. So now we're building our shared library. And again, I'm going to remove our program here just so we can, um, uh, make sure that we're doing a clean build here. And in fact, let's remove all the static libraries here. So my math, my math too, and, uh, my math, uh, dot a here. Okay. Just to show you what our project looks like. Okay. So I've got these two, uh, shared object files. Oops. One more here and that's it. We don't have our actual executable. I can't do dot slash prog. It doesn't exist. Okay. Um, okay. So how am I going to compile this now? Well, let's try GCC. I've got my main file and the source directory that I want to run here and let's try to output the program here. So I'll go ahead and hit enter. And again, no include path. Okay. So we need to do that. And now I'm getting really interesting error messages here, and they're not coming from the compiler, but they're coming from the linker here. Anytime you get this sort of undefined reference, it says undefined reference to add. Okay. Because we're trying to use this add function, but it doesn't really know about it. It knows that we've included it. We've got a declaration here that says, Hey, this thing exists, but we don't know exactly, uh, the actual implementation that's from here, right? Our actual implementation file, the dot, uh, see a file here. So, uh, how do we fix this for both add and multiply? Well, lucky for us, we do have again, if I look at our directory here, this shared library file that has the actual compiled, uh, code with the implementation, right? If I wind back my commands here, uh, we created these shared libraries. Again, let me go back here with this command here, which basically said, Hey, I want to build this shared library, something that I can link in, uh, when my program is about to run. And, uh, this is the actual file. And then this is the library and then any, you know, sort of includes to set up that actual code. Now position independent code. I'll talk about again in a moment, but first, um, you know, I still want to, um, try to, uh, let me go back to our, uh, compilation that we try to do here and show you these errors. Well, let me try to show you a tool on Linux, just to give you an idea of what's happening here. So there's a really neat tool called object dump, uh, which I may have mentioned before in this series or other, uh, videos, uh, which will display some information about this actual, uh, executable here. So object dump dash T and I'll run, uh, it on the actual program here. Um, and oops, it didn't actually make it, but that's okay. Let me, let me do that step next to show you, let me show you how to actually link things and then I'll show you a jump. Um, but how do I, I guess the question is glue in the code. Well, I actually link in those libraries here. So my math, uh, my math. So, and then I link in my math, uh, do that as so here. Okay. So let me try that. Uh, now it says it can't find these directories here. Okay. So let's try again. I think we're going to have to do, uh, at least two steps here. Uh, now it looks like they're right in the, you know, directory that we have, but again, we have to tell our compiler or in this case, a tool called the linker, where exactly these libraries are. So with that, I use dash capital L and then it's just this current directory here. So I'll do that. And well, this is kind of weird. It still says, Hey, can't find these actual libraries here. Now there's two things I can try here to fix this one. I can put these in quotation marks. Let me try this here and still doesn't work. Darn. Uh, well, the convention is whenever we try to do this is that these actual, uh, shared libraries, uh, should actually start with lib in front of them. Okay. So, uh, I want to move my math SO to live my math.so, and I'll do the same thing for my math too. And let's go ahead and try it again. And oops. Uh, let me go ahead and look at this for just one more time here. And again, this is going to be a little bit weird. Uh, if you haven't done this before, but you'll get used to it. It's to say, uh, well, it can't find this library. Well, we actually have to understand what this dash L is doing here. I'm going to show you the fix now. It's just to get rid of the end here, the dot SO. So again, just by convention, uh, let me show you what the working command is, uh, by convention dash L stands for the library that you're going to link. And on this, um, again, our, our linker is going to assume that lib is in front of this and dot SO is at the end. So if it finds those things, it's going to, um, essentially append and prepend, uh, live to this at the front and dot SO at the end. Okay. So that's what you're going to get here. Okay. So at this point, we have our program executable. This is great here. Now let's go ahead and try to run it. Let's see what it does. And then yet another error here. And at this point, maybe you're saying, Mike, I'm frustrated with, uh, to take care of these, uh, shared libraries here. It's saying lib my math dot SO cannot open shared object file, no such, uh, file or directory. Okay. But you know, it's clear that it is right here, um, in this actual location here. Uh, so what do we actually have to do here? Well, this is going to seem a little bit silly again, but what actually needs to happen is we need to tell our, uh, linker at the runtime. Where do we actually find these libraries? I'm going to say, well, if it was able to compile it, why weren't we able to find it? But the truth is we need to know or have some common directory for where to find our, our libraries that can be loaded here. So we've got a environment variable for this load library path, uh, that we can set here. And then we'll set our path and then try to run our program, something like this here. Okay. So now we can actually try something like, um, this, which is just saying, Hey, look in the actual, uh, current directory. So whenever you click on some shortcut, for instance, if you're on another system or, you know, execute some program, it might actually be a pending something like this current library directory. So you could find whatever your path is, or just put in the current path here, um, in order to get your code to run. Now this is actually using the library code here, which is really, really cool. Okay. Now let me back up and show you that object dump tool here with the table, um, the symbol table for our actual program here. And what's really neat or what I think is neat, and I've got to make this just a little bit smaller so you can see it reasonably here is if we actually find some of these functions here and let's go ahead and see, here's the multiply function, which was in our library. Uh, here's add, and I'll just bring up this one since you have it on the right side of the screen here. This tool is actually telling me the actual symbols that it's finding in that object file, this executable object file program. And we can see that F in this column is for function and that it's undefined. Okay. So that's why we were getting the error sort of saying, Hey, we don't know what to do with this thing. We know that you have, you know, uh, included the header file, you've linked things together, but at the actual runtime, we're going to actually have to sort of patch in this symbol, right? This named thing called, uh, add here. And that's actually what uh, needs to happen before we can run this program. Uh, so that's just a little uh, preview of this tool here. All right. So with that said, folks, I'm going to go ahead and start, uh, wrapping us up here and just want to summarize what we've learned here. And here is our final structure for our shared libraries. So we've learned how to, uh, if I wind back here, uh, create our actual, uh, libraries. Okay. So let me go back. Uh, let me just show you how to do that. GCC, uh, generate the position, independent code shared here, and then the actual, uh, file that we are trying to build here. Source my math, uh, dot C for instance. And let's just get this on one line here. I can close these out because they're relatively trivial. And then the, uh, include here. Uh, so this was an example of building our, uh, lib. I'll name it appropriately this time. My math thought, uh, so, and there we have it, uh, overriding this here. Now again, why do we need the position independent code? Well, imagine if I'm linking in lots of different libraries here, basically what the linkers job is, uh, this tool that's sort of running behind the scenes. That's actually called LD. Uh, if you want to read about this is it's has to patch in code. Uh, so the code that's being generated here is sort of, um, validating that this code is real with the compiler, right? There's no syntax errors or these types of things, but also generate it in a way that again, depending on where this library gets loaded and how many libraries are, it can be sort of patched in. That's sort of the linkers job. Okay. So we learned about this idea of shared libraries. Now what, what's interesting, uh, the last thing that we really need to do to, to, to bring us full circle is to look at, uh, maybe the size of this executable here. And for this example, I don't think we're getting a great sense here of how much code we saved last time with our static library, it was greater than 16 K. Uh, now it's a little bit smaller. So again, this is just showing you that with a shared library, you can save a lot of space, uh, by doing this process. Okay. So anyway, let's go ahead and summarize by saying, here's how we make a shared library. Uh, we can just make this a regular static library by go ahead and, uh, compile my math dot C and I'll just do these for one of them here with our include. Uh, and that'll just, um, oops, uh, that'll just, uh, compile the one file. And since we're just compiling one dash C here, so we can go ahead and, um, see our my math dot O file here, right here. Uh, and that would give us the static library. And if we have a collection of these, we can use the archive tool. Uh, and I'll just do this for, uh, my math. So we're going to, uh, create or replace the index. If it doesn't exist, create it and then set up the index here, my math dot O and let's go ahead and give it, uh, I don't know our math dot A or whatever we want to call that archive file. And then we can see that that's file here is now something that we can share with our friends and statically link in or glue together our code. So we might again think about this. If we want our distribution to be really easy, sometimes it's nice to just package everything together. If we think that this library is something that we are going to update over time on an application that we're going to distribute, then that's where we might want to think more about this shared library strategy, which again is another advantage of, I can just update this library that's not glued into an executable or anything. Uh, and that will effectively be a way that we can update our system. Now there's one other thing. If you do want to see it post in the comments below and I can talk about it. That's also pretty interesting. These this way that you can also through the C API open and close a shared object. So at runtime of your actual application, you can load in code and this is how you would sort of build a plugin system. If you wanted to use this. So I'll just kind of leave this here as a teaser. If it's something that you're interested in seeing, I'll monster lesson and I want to just go ahead and leave this here with the working command lines here, how to create our shared object file here, how to create our static object and then, or static library and then how to archive it into one place here. So with the archive RCS name of our library, our math that a and my math that O or you know, my math, you know, we had my math two here, for example, and that'll do the trick here. All right, folks, so hopefully that was useful. Hopefully enjoyed this lesson, a bit of a monster lesson, kind of fun to follow along with and try doing this and try to do, you know, with one file at first, then try with two and see how you can link things together. I've got some other talks on my channel, if you'd like to check out about the whole compilation process that can hopefully make this also make sense. But with that said, let me know if this was useful. If you have questions below or want to see us dig further into these types of things, happy to do that. With that said though, we'll see you in the next lesson very, very soon.
