Title: How to Load Libraries at Runtime
Video ID: _kIa4D7kQ8I
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Hey everybody, welcome back. Today is Libraries in C, Part 2. I recently made a video that showed you how to make Libraries in C. That included static libraries and shared libraries, or dynamic libraries, sometimes called DLLs. And if you missed that video, you might want to check it out, because it'll make today's video make a little more sense. But our discussion last time left out a big piece of the puzzle, and that piece of the puzzle is dynamic loading. So we made dynamic libraries last time, and I talked about how they're loaded at runtime, but we still knew what libraries we were using, and we knew what functions we were going to call when we compiled the program. So what happens if you don't know what functions you're going to call? You don't know what libraries you're going to use, and that's all going to be dynamic at runtime. That's our topic for today. Let's say I'm writing a program, and I want later on to be able to add or remove functionality from it, but without recompiling the whole thing. Well, one way that I could do that is to make shared libraries and then load them dynamically. And to do this in C, we're going to use three functions, one to open the library, one to get symbols from the library, and one that closes the library. Now in Linux or Mac OS, this is going to be DL open, DL sim, and DL close. In Windows, it's going to be load library or load library X, get proc address, and free library. The functions have different names, but on each platform, they basically are doing the same thing. 

All right, let's jump into code and look at an example of how this works. First, let's make a few shared libraries. I'm going to add two functions to this library. The first I'm just going to add so that we can get information about what the library does. It's basically the library can tell us what it does, and it just returns a string. And the second is just going to do some operation on a number. So in this case, it just adds one, and that's why I call the library lib plus one. Okay, now let's make another called lib plus two, just the same, except this one adds two to the number. 

Now we need a test program, and this program is going to use our libraries. So it's going to take two arguments, a library name and a number. And we don't know what library we're going to use at compile time, so we're going to use dlopen to open the library that the user specified. Okay, so dlopen takes two arguments. The name of the library we want to open and flags. Basically, it tells how you want it to load. In this case, I'm telling it that I want to use lazy loading, which just means that the functions are going to be loaded when I try to use them. There are other options. I'm going to leave you to look through the man pages, check them out, but they're pretty straightforward. And dlopen will return null if it couldn't find the library. And so we're just going to check for that right here. And now let's declare a function pointer that looks like the function I want from the library. And in this case, it's one that takes an int and returns an int. And then we can call the dlsim function to get the address of a named function in the library we just opened and assign it to that function pointer. 

At this point, I just want to mention some of you may not be comfortable with function pointers. That's okay. These declarations can be a little bit obtuse. If you're finding function pointers difficult, you might want to check out one of the first videos that I made back when I first started this channel. It's on function pointers. It breaks down sort of how the declarations work and gives you some ideas on maybe how to understand them. I will link to that in the description. But this code right here is just saying go get a function called do operation from this library and give me a pointer to it so I can call it. Okay, so now let's apply the function to a number that the user gave us. So the user gave us a number. Let's just, we're just going to print out that plus one. And we're going to print out the before and after. And then of course, don't forget to close the library. 

Now let's make a quick make file that will compile the two libraries. Note that I'm doing this on my Mac today so that I'm using the extension dylib. If you were on Linux, it would be .so but everything else would work just the same. Okay, so now we can compile our code and we can run it. Remember, it takes a library name and a number. So let's run it with our first library and that seems to be working. It adds one. Okay, now we can run it and pass in our second library and it adds two. 

Okay, now for good measure, let's just make use of our other function in our libraries and let's add another function pointer. This one takes no arguments and returns a character pointer just like the function in our library. And it's called get library name. So okay, so let's put in our code. Let's print out the library name. Okay, so now it prints out the string we returned. Great. So now one final thing. DLSim can return null if the library didn't have the function I asked for or if I got the name wrong, then it's going to return null. And we all know calling a null function never ends well. So let's check our pointers. And you can see that now if I get the name wrong, it now catches it, which is a lot better than a segfault. At least we know what happened. And so that's it. Now you know how to make a program that loads a library at runtime that it didn't even know existed at compile time. And this can be a powerful tool for making software that's easier to extend, that's more modular and easier to update. 

And I hope this helps you out. I hope it gives you an idea of what options are out there when working with libraries. And until next time, happy coding and I will see you later.
