Title: Short introduction to signals in C
Video ID: 5We_HtLlAbs
Detected language: en
------------------------------------------------------------

Another communication method between processes that is used all throughout Linux is signals. Unlike pipes where you could send say an array, signals, with signals you just sort of send a notification, just a simple integer that says to the other process what it should do. And that's it, it doesn't send any more information. And that is used to sort of take control of that process. So for example, if I have a process and I want to pause it, to pause its execution, well, I can actually do that using signals. Now let's see how we can send such a signal. To start off, we're gonna actually fork our process. I'm gonna say if PID equals fork, and if our PID is negative one, then I'm just gonna return an error code. Okay, and then if we are in the child process, if our PID is zero, I want to do something not amazing. That is just an infinite loop of printing sentences on the screen. And I don't want it to print out at maximum speed. I just, let's say I want 20 times a second to print on the screen. So I'm just gonna sleep. I'm gonna call the use sleep function. And this guy takes in the number of microseconds it should just pause its execution. I'm gonna give it here. Since microseconds are one millionth of a second, I'm gonna give it 50,000 millionth of a second. That's really 50 milliseconds and that should be exactly 120th of a second. This use sleep function you can find in uniSTD.h. All right, and let's say in the else program, what we do is just simply wait of null. That's all. Now this is a bit problematic because the program just continues on printing on the screen forever and ever and ever and ever and ever and ever. And it never stops. So both the parent and the child are just gonna get stuck. So if I try to launch this, well, you'll notice that it's just gonna keep on printing on the terminal here. Even if I try to terminate the process here, I'm just gonna terminate the parent and the child process is gonna keep on printing on the screen. So I don't have to go to htop and actually kill the process. Although what I just did, basically terminating that process from the htop command, can be done programmatically in C and you can send signals even here. To do so, we're gonna need to include first signal.h. So I'm just gonna include here signal.h and this guy gives us a simple function that we can call on the parent to kill the child process that just kind of started executing in an infinite loop. To send a signal to another process, we can call the function named kill and albeit the name is strange, it doesn't necessarily kill the process. It just sends a signal and then the process that receives that signal knows what to do with it, whether it is to terminate itself or pause its execution or whatever else it might need to do. In this case, what we're gonna do is actually terminate the process. So we're gonna first have to pass in the process ID that we want to send the signal to. So well, we know the process ID is this speed here, because that's what we're receiving in the parent process. And next is the signal that we want to send and that is we want to send the sig kill signal that should actually terminate the child process. And now to make sure that the while loop runs for a while, I'm gonna wait for a second using the slip function that takes in just seconds here. So I'm gonna say slip of one. So wait one second before actually killing the child process, which should print about 20 lines in the terminal. So if I try to launch this now, you will notice that we're gonna get some lines of code of text printed on the screen, and then both processes actually finish their execution. With this, we were able to actually stop the execution of a process that kept on executing something forever and ever. This is useful when you have something like an event handler that keeps on listening for things to receive forever and ever until someone sends the sig kill signal or other types of signals. Now, a really important thing to notice here is that receiving signals did not depend on the order of the execution of the code. So right with pipes, we had to actually hit a line of code that said read or write or something specific. But in here, even though we were in a while loop, the signal got handled and the process got killed. So these signals are sort of outside the code they're executing. So whenever you're executing some code, if you receive a signal, the process just pauses there for a second and executes the code that needs to be executed when a signal is received. And in this case, it actually terminated the process so nothing else was printed afterwards. But suppose you could actually send different signals, telling it whatever you want. And after it is handled, it could continue to execution. Now there are all sorts of signals in Linux. Here's a list of them. You don't really have to know all of them. You don't really have to use all of them, but here they are. And some notes here. You can see the SIG child process, which is actually the signal that is sent from the child to the parent when a child actually terminates. And there's a few other ones that we can take a look here. Here's SIG kill that we have used to actually stop the process. And down here, I think it is, there's SIGUSR1 and SIGUSR2. So these are sort of signals that are not defined by the operating system. They are user-defined. So they are there for basically for somebody to use them in case you want something custom. As you can see, all the others actually have some sort of default functionality. Other interesting, notable signals are the SIGSTOP signal, which just basically stops the execution, pauses the execution of the process, so that, well, the process is not terminated. It can continue its execution, but it's just paused. And then when it receives the SIGCONT or SIGCONTINUE signal, it can continue its execution. So with this, you can actually basically control whether or not a process is executing or not. That's really all I wanted to talk about in today's video, just a very, very basic explanation of signals. They are different from pipes and they are used to control, mostly control the processes at a sort of granular level, just terminate the process or stop the process or something related to processes or IO happened. In later lessons, we're gonna take a look at how to actually handle a signal, because right now we just send a SIGKILL command and it automatically kills itself, but you can actually tell it how to handle that signal. You can actually tell it to ignore certain signals and a lot more other customizations can be achieved with these signals. It is quite interesting. So I hope you stick around. Okay, thank you guys so much for watching. I hope you got something out of it. If you do have any questions, you can leave them down in the comments below or on our Discord server. Take care, bye.
